---
title: "Each Day Poking"
date: 2024-10-01T21:38:55+08:00
keywords: ["ohio olarte", "oqolarte", "oqo"]
draft: false
math: false
---

{{< ongoing >}}

***Each day poking*** is a writing exercise borne out of the need to be
creative again as I transition to [brief?] unemployment, spanning the
month of October 2024.

The goal is to write *daily* streams of consciousness, parallel to
[*Imbentori*](/imbentori) but for the older-me.

Each entry could also be a script for a hypothetical YouTube channel or
a podcast, or both.

When life gets in the way, some
entries might be so short, or I might not be able to write anything.
Whether I am pressuring myself to produce an outlet will have to be
observed on the day itself.

{{< toc >}}

## Day 1

Someone is smoking. It is so familiar yet so offensive. I have grown to
hate the smell of anything burning, especially that of a not-so-subtle,
legal addiction. It is a bit odd, though, knowing that I was once a
smoker myself.

Stranger still, I am currently within the proximity of or facilitating
different nicotine-related surveys. [Capitalism](/capitalism) incentivizes hypocrisy by
allowing it to be one of the major ways to live and afford a decent food
and housing. Thankfully, I will not be doing them soon. Time to drop off
these things underneath which I barely comprehend. All of it, and
finally regain what was gradually being lost to cognitive dissonance for
the past three years.

I do not miss the risk of cells calcifying into cancer in my body. I
left that miserable hobby, and I will not be subjecting my being through
that again. But I do not blame people for seeking the hook. I, too, was
once on their side, shedding minutes by transmuting tobacco into
snake-trails to heaven.

Big tobacco company smuggles tons of sticks into the hands of the
underprivleged, and they get away with it, like they often do, because
of some outreach program "for the environment" or some doublespeak noun
they come up with.

No one should have the gall to openly light a cig in the presence of
non-smokers. (Yes, I mean that in the literal and figurative sense.)
Inconsiderate moves like that snag the throats of unsuspecting people
akin to lying to them akin to green-lighting the kill order that can
only be legally executed through capitalist machinery.

{{< btt >}}

## Day 2

Already, I can hear the gears turning and the knobs within emit a foul
smell, those bits and pieces attached to the complaints center. I read
the print out: "WHY DOES ONE FORCE ONESELF TO CREATE?"

I don't know, but certainly not because there isn't enough drama in my
life.

But what does that have to do with this effort? I don't know.

I can feel the stomach grumbling; I shall not remove it from its pit. I
wonder, though what its print out says. "EVENING---

METABOLISM DROPS, AND YET THERE IS NEED FOR FOOD."

Of course. Time to check in with the body. Putting this off for
tomorrow. A better one. Lovelier and obviously with more effort,
something I to be sold to a therapist.

{{< btt >}}

## Day 3

The dice landed 12. Within the confines of two cubes rolling, it's value
aplenty. Versus the bigger picture, of course, that's nothing. But
throwing dice, instead of dicks, is more socially acceptable for a bored
local functionary that's often in arm's length to a public announcement
system.

But, I ask, is it better than pressing a button and speaking into the PA
system when it's already late at night?

I look at the time: 10 PM. The tingling sensation doesn't come until I
hear the announcement, more cringe than a shiver of disappointment. I
don't know why I feel that, but I make fun of the situation when I
become aware of it. Someone right about now is on their way to the PA
system. As they pace, they shake two dice in the globe of their two
palms before breaking it open onto the table where the microphone sits.

"Good evening, neighbors," the announcement begins, the voice that of a
man, in his 30s maybe, or older. "Please call your kids home as we now
enter the nightly curfew." The dice land snake eyes.

Twelve hours earlier, I wanted something completely different. Partisans
of certain flavor of local leftist politics has coopted what it's like
to be an activist, making [activism](/activism) much worse in the eyes
of the State. Neither will I associate myself to any of them nor will I
ever understand the cunning that, in the end, causes more harm to
anything and anyone it touches.

{{< btt >}}

## Day 4

I look up and is greeted by no more than the asbestos roof, a regular
material for the type of housing erected for the projects back in the
50s and 60s. At the time, it is *the* specification.

Like the rest that came along with it, the house is a regular one. The
rooms in it are regular, too, with common shapes for rooms that are
mostly rectangular prisms.

We were talking about something ordinary when a half-baked-dream humanoid
slipped into the room with only a towel around the torso. The
room we were in is where all the people in the regular house would
change clothes. Naturally, the humanoid could not do that with us
occupying it.

So, imagine my shock to find them slowly unwrapping the towel in front
of us, keeping their back to us, and below it, a seamless undergarment
of light blue-grey tint same to that of the asbestos. Can something be
so freaky yet so coy---freak-coy?

{{< btt >}}
