---
title: "Imagining accessibility"
date: 2025-02-18
draft: true
math: false
---

PROMPT: https://www.instagram.com/p/DGM6o4mzRD5/

> What if in the near future, most of us are disabled? With a failing
> neoliberal healthcare system, all our bodies subject to increasingly
> carcinogenic and polluted environments, the rising cost of living
> coupled with stagnant wages, and state resources deployed to terrorize
> the poorest among us, it seems inevitable that disability and illness
> will become the reality for the vast majority of us. Yet most utopian
> futures rely on ableist beliefs that disability can be cured, and in
> doing so fail to consider accessibility as a central feature of a
> better world. The reality of widespread disability should compel us to
> reframe accessibility as more than ramps and elevators---it is a lens
> through which we can radically reimagine our world. Disability justice
> is central to creating a world wherein everyone’s needs are met.
> 
> Can we reimagine care beyond capitalist notions of profit and
> productivity? Can we dream of societies where no one needs to perform
> their disability in hopes of securing an ID for paltry benefits? Can we
> create communities where accessibility and inclusion are not solely the
> concern of the disabled? How can we reform our healthcare system and our
> social security policies to protect the most vulnerable among us? Paper
> Trail Projects is encouraging everyone to create Brave New Words that
> broaden the horizon of the accessible future and position it as a deeply
> political issue that concerns the vast majority of us.

- Is it possible to recast disability as differently abled?
    - Not because we want to soften the hit and beveling the pointed
      corners of what it means to be a person with disabilities (PWDs),
      but being outside of of what is considered normal opens up new
      possibilities. The last bit hopefully does not sound like I am
      glorifying disabilities. But listening to PWDs and creating spaces
      that include their inputs benefit everyone.
- Convenience is not necessarily the same as accessibility.
    - Making life hyper-efficient because it means more convenience is
      just transferring the risks to the more vulnerable people in the
      population.
    - Optimizing for efficiency is addiction to productivity, itself at
      tool of capitalism that is always hungry for More, demands More,
      until we are No More.
    - We can build accessible spaces for everyone, here IRL ("in real
      life") and in the digital space, without polishing all the knobs,
      so to speak, that they are all ultra-clean. Riffing off of the
      knob metaphor, actual knobs are not too friendly to people who may
      have weaker or non-existent grips; lever door handles are more
      accessible.
    - We need enough friction, in all sense of the word,
      because it is the process with which we can grow as individuals
      and as members of a larger community.
- Frictionlessness---or just comforts---of our lives is like having a
  clean space to live in in which cleaning really just means displacing
  the dirt and unwanted stuff to some place else that we hope to not see
  again. The friction, represtented by dirt and clutter, does not
  disappear; it is absorbed by that Dirty Place. To be clear, the
  Dirty Place is just a catchall phrase to mean a place where many of us
  would not rather be in. Sadly, the less fortunate, people in abject
  poverty usually have nowhere else to go but the Dirty Place.
