---
title: "Antifragile"
date: 2024-09-03
draft: false
math: false
---

*Mostly raw notes from Nassim Nicholas Taleb's book of the same title.
Each paragraph can be considered a self-contained note.*

{{< toc >}}

Learning things and building to a level of resilience requires practice.
Action trumps thinking alone. **Practice over theory**. On the flip
side, words are scalable, and through them we can share knowledge across
generations and spanning large distances.

**Black swan**, as coined by Taleb, is a rare event with significant
impacts. It is impossible to calculate the risks of such events and
predict when (not if) they would happen.

**Test of asymmetry**: "Anything that has more upside than downside from
random events (or certain shocks) is antifragile; the reverse if
fragile."

[Social revolution](/revolution) that changes everything and everyone
from the ground up might be slow to progress, but under the "right
amount" of [disorder](/chaos),
it will make all things affected antifragile,
except the empire---the [empire](/empire) will fall.

If most of history comprise
black swans, how useful is it to create routines? Shouldn't we all start
vibrating in random directions until we toughen up?

Ethics of risk-taking: One shall not have antifragility at the expense
of the fragility of others.

In the modern iteration of *progress*, what are we sacrificing, or
giving away, or destroying in its name? If progress would require a
rainforest be razed flat to make way for farmlands or data centers,
then have we really progressed? If so, on whose metrics?

[Fragilistas](https://fs.blog/the-fragilista/), naive rationalists
according to Taleb, are usually white-collar knowledge workers who
believe that things they do not understand do not exist---a dangerous,
arrogant thought that makes them vulnerable to harm. The author adds,
"The fragilista ... is one who makes you engage in policies and actions,
all artificial, in which the benefits are small and visible, and the
side effects potentially severe and invisible."

It is okay to have one's actions result to small benefits, especially if
it is sustainable in terms of effort. But think about the possible
negative side effects: are they going to be so severe that they outweigh
the benefits? Some example/s:
- taking medication with little benefits but would greatly damage kidneys and/or liver;
- doing *everything* and effectively accomplishes nothing;

Ignorance is a key human trait we could harness and be proud of to deal
with life's uncertainty. It *is* okay to not know everything.

To have integrity, one must eat one's own cooking. Software developers
even call this
[dogfooding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eating_your_own_dog_food),
that is, the practice of using one own's services, or in lay terms,
believing *and* doing what one says and/or endorses. But Taleb goes a
bit further when he puts his ideas on antifragility and black swans:
"Compromising is condoning." This is a bold statement which I don't
necessarily agree with. In a world that is largely gray areas and middle
grounds, [building better relationships](/friendship) with people often
means meeting them halfway. Of course, there are many instances where we
cannot compromise, like we certainly don't want to enable harm-doers.

[Stochastic tinkering](https://cleanlanguage.com/stochastic-tinkering/) is
discovering something new that you don't intend
to, and using it anyway to carry on with the search/experiment.

The fragility of large systems (e.g., big corporations) which many
people have come to rely on for daily tasks puts its dependents as
[potential] collateral damage when these systems eventually break. Still
using big corpos as our example, how many times have they tanked and put
the lives of people in harm? [Recall the 2008 global financial crisis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2007%E2%80%932008_financial_crisis).

As societies continue to evolve, we continue to be more vulnerable each
time we choose the benefits of cutting-edge [technology](/technology).
Many people could not live if many of their comforts, larely granted
and/or made possible by these techs, are taken away.

*Hormesis*---a word coined by pharmacologists---is ingesting small dose
of harm, and is believed to have beneficial effects, make humans
stronger, more robust. Examples:
- fasting (harming the body via hunger);
- physical exercise (harming the body by stressing the body);
- vaccination (harming the body by injecting diseases)
- freedom (harming the status quo and comforts by being involved in
  small conflicts)

In psychology, [post-traumatic growth](https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/basics/post-traumatic-growth) (PTG)
is positive psychological change experienced as a result of struggling
with highly challenging, highly stressful life circumstances. Survivors
of trauma forge stronger relationships with loved ones and with other
victims. It is
commonly reported in cancer survivors. A more controversial example
would be sexual assault victims "taking back" their sexuality by
processing their trauma to eventually re-enjoy having [lots of] sex,
sometimes becoming hypersexual.

Related to PTG, Taleb recommends to get into "serious" trouble to force
ourselves to innovate. I guess it's up to us how serious is *serious*.

When we delagate the boring tasks to automation, we are getting back
some of the time that would otherwise be spent in dread. But are we also
saving ourselves from future mishaps which *may* lead to PTG? Perhaps,
we should *not* delegate 100% of the boring tasks.
[Autonomation](/autonomation) is the right balance, and it allows us to
combine human intelligence with the efficiency of automated machine
work.

In meetings, both formal and informal, I seem to be unknowingly
"disfluent," which is a fancy way of saying that, for some reason,
obvious or otherwise, people cannot immediately understand what I am
saying. (Side note: given my fascination for things [absurd](/absurdism)
and [surreal](/surrealism), my occassional disfluency may not be out of
brand at all.) But Taleb, and some pro-disfluency psychology
researchers, believe that disfluency forces the audience assuming they
haven't zoned out yet, to actively listen more and digest what the
speaker is trying to say. This forces the brain to engage more with the
activity, and thus retaining more of the important information.

Planning with redundancy in mind is a step closer to being more
antifragile. Extra preparedness is never wasteful because something
unusual always happens. Some questions to consider:
- How extra-prepared are you willing to be?
- Do you have the necessary resources to achieve the level of
  extra-preparedness you want? If not, is a lower tier possible?

In a hypothetical tight-knit [community](/community) where things are
shared among its neightbors, having multiple, say, power tools of the
same kind makes the tool library robust. If one circular saw breaks, the
community's work will not be jeopardized.

Unhealthy behaviors can cause antifragile emotions that might be a form
of abuse. Let's be wary that stressors like these do exist as net harm;
and that antifragility also exists in negative forms.

Non-living things cannot be intrinsically antifragile. But if/when they
can be [repurposed and/or upcycled](/repair), then this human
intervention introduces strength and life, and one could argue that this
things are made robust again.

Now, as living beings, to aspire for equilibrium, for "peace", is to
want Death, because it is *the* end state that is truly peaceful.
Nothing happens after one dies. So, we must learn to accept and learn to
thrive in places where there are stressors that could make us stronger.

My "unwanted" feelings *are* source of vital information. Mood including
sadness and anxiety could be a good source of intelligence as they
[in]directly notify me of what is happening in my surroundings and the
people in it.

Longer life spans means more time. More time means more exposure to
stressors. Optimistically, this could also mean more chances to affect
change.

Being human ulitimately is to live a colorful life far from convenience
and efficiency that empire has set up to blind us with and bind us to
its comforts, so we couldn't, wouldn't think of anything else. Being
human is not being a tourist in this world. We explore, because that is
more fulfilling. Chaos nurtures.

No one and nothing can prepare for the future, let alone withstand *all*
of its random obstacles. Even with modern tech, we cannot perfectly
predict (i.e., 100% accuracy) the future. Robust and antifragile systems
don't rely on predictions, unlike fragile ones, whose predictions need
to be as accurate as possible. In my honest opinion, though,
[futurist prediction is only fun to read *sometimes*](https://danluu.com/futurist-predictions/); I'd rather read
science fiction.

How small can an error be for it to be exploited for the benefit of the
entire system? Must lives be lost? Taleb explains that "small" means
[statistically small](/statistics/#statistical-significance).

If we don't look after the individuals that are local to us, are we also
allowing cracks in the society as whole?

In the book, Taleb argues that "we humans may have to be self-centered
at the expense of other species, at the risk of ecological fragility, if
it insures our survival." Not sure if I fully grasp what he's saying,
but humans **must** work with nature because we are a part of it. Our
interests should NOT prevail over but along WITH those of the Nature.

Taleb has hinted on the benefits of [abolishing](/abolition)
nation-states and building bottom-up communities. But he still latches
on to "city-states" which, if I understand correctly, is still operated
by State, albeit a much smaller version of it.

Small is beautiful. The aggregate of many small things culminate to
diverse insights, which is always a good thing.

Fat tails are highly unpredictable events that play a disproportionate
role which are far more volatile in the long run.

Taleb discusses the *Great Turkey Problem*: Turkeys are fed to get fat
in time for Thanksgiving. Turkey thinks that butchers love turkeys, a
projection based on past data. However, fat tails can't be predicted by
historical data. In this scenario, the fat tail (AKA the great turkey
problem) is the time when the butcher will slaughter the turkey to
become food, which the bird most likely did not foresee, until it's too
late.

Modernity is a human-made domination of the natural environment, the
systematic smoothening of world's jaggedness in order for it to be more
comfortable to "walk on" especially for the few people who can afford
it. Taleb adds, "Sophistication continuously puts us ahead of ourselves,
creating things we are [less] capable of understanding." This is kind of
like how ethics can't keep up with the evolution of tech or the
advancement of pharmaceuticals.

Taleb posits that [iatrogenics](/iatrogenics), or naive interventions to
heal or repair, incur risks to those directly affected by the
intervention (e.g., patients of the doctor). In medicine, this
intervention *harms* the patient in the long run, even if in the short
term it seems otherwise.

There is no reward for bringing the truth except in maybe bringing the
collective consciousness one step closer to it. Even then, recognition
might be sparse and/or not within lifetime.

[Access to more data](/data-management) increases exposure to more
noise, unless there is a reliable way to turn data to insights, or
better, wisdom---minus the profit incentive, of course.

In making new or updating current systems which we live in, we should
include during the [design](/design) phase ways to withstand or get
stronger once entropy inevitably increases.

Seneca's barbell illustrates the idea of dealing with two extremes and
avoiding the middle. One extreme is playing it safe in some areas; the
other is taking lots of small risks to be more robust.

In the intersection of barbell and [communication](/communication),
Taleb suggests that we should consume *both* trashy gossip magazines and
classic sophisticated works. "Trashy" gossip also is a treasure trove of
info, if one digs deep enough; it can reveal the current desires of the
masses.

Freedom is the ultimate option. In the current empire, it might mean
having [financial independence](/personal-finance/#financial-independence)--- to have enough fuck-you money to not be obligated to exchange my life to "earn a living." Beyond that, freedom means being with the family I choose, and the community I want to be part of.

[Fringe ideas and ideologies](/politics) grounded in the daily life are
antifragile because they are capable to be widely adopted yet no one
central authority is enforcing people to adopt these.

It is okay to not be smart. Being smart is overrated. Better: don't do
unintelligent things, especially those that might cause harm to you or
others.

Options = asymmetry + rationality  
where rationality is assessing what good to keep and what bad to ditch.

Trial and error, while not efficient, is still an effective way of
searching for answer/solution to a problem. In cases where the reward is
a positive Black Swan, every dead end is itself a useful information,
because it narrows down the search for the reward. Some call it
investment.

Optionality allows for progress. Narratives can be used to distort it.
The former allows us to learn from mistakes; the latter can hinder us
by invoking irreversible effects.

Not knowing why matters less than actually being able to do, or start
doing, the thing. [Academizing something](/academy) is not needed in order to
participate in it. For example, I can ride a bike without knowing the
physics of how to balance on two moving wheels. But if doing is what
eventually leads to success, Taleb argues that history is written by
losers, people who have "free time on their hands and a protected
academic position."

Moreover, the author argues, "Experimentation can
make people much more careful than theories[,]" because the former
exposes one to more risks, like using actual resources and possibly skirting
safety. Playing with theories allows one to be safer, but it's harder to
rely on its results compared to actual experiments.

In the YouTube channel Good Work's video,
[What do Wall Street quants actually do?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DuBrreMiZlA)" they look
for the answer to the question presenting it through humor. In the end,
the presenter Dan Toomey reveals that quants merely *speculate*. "They
try as hard as they can to turn uncertainties into certainties all in
the glorious name of getting the bag."

People who love rationalism and emobody its ideals in their interactions
should know that logic excludes nuances. Many of the Truths we seek are
only in those nuances. Thus, logic alone cannot, will not save us from
our problems, especially when it involves other people. The genius, I've
read, is in the minutiae.

Bottlenecks are literally squeezes. When a process, system, or situation
forces you to do something no matter the cost, that's a *squeeze*.
Poverty can be argued as a systemic squeeze (one way of spelling
*oppression* in two words) because it forces poor people to do things
they wouldn't do if they had better situations.

In the past, [projects were completed on time due to lack of complex processes](/projm)
and complicated people, but also because of decentralization,
I think.

**Efficiency** is one of the most important metrics in
[technology](/technology) and [engineering](/engineering). Beyond these
two, it is also present in work productivity, in which it is highly
valued in the rat maze. Thus, it is hard to see that as we attain more
efficiencies in the systems we operate in, we introduce more fragility.
This is because to be more efficient, systems require more complexity.

The idea behind the barbell strategy, i.e., betting on extremes and
ignoring the safer middle, is to remove things that cause fragility. To
know which things to remove is, of course, to learn about them by doing.
It's hard to rely on theories alone as they cannot, do not fully reflect
the apparent reality, which contains and hides nuances that often change
without notice.

Tech bros tend to lack creativity and elegance, despite them spouting
these words on their tech blogs, which are also devoid of creativity and
elegance, if I say so myself. From what I have read and seen, they
worship technology and its supposed effect too much, that many things
beyond it don't matter to them, like [privacy](/privacy) or ethics.

It doesn't matter whether an old on-going tradition doesn't make sense;
it will likely to go on for as long as there are people continuing its
legacy. In that sense, long standing traditions are robust, if not
antifragile.

"[T]he non-natural needs to prove its benefits, not the natural," argues
the author. Evidence must then be produced to prove or disprove
something entirely (or mostly) caused by humans. For example, it's up to
tobacco companies to disprove whether nicotine and other chemicals
inhaled through smoking or vaping does not do any damage to lungs (for
this one: anything that is not the natural air is just not for the
lungs).

We humans have been shaping the spaces around us since before
civilization. It is in this process of shaping that we have learned
about agriculture, which led to specialization of work, which led us,
eventually, to here and now. But throughout this human history, we have
also been outsmarting nature, or at least trying to, and we have cause
more harm to us and to other living things in the planet.

Humans should not be given explosive toys (like atomic bombs, financial
derivatives, or tools to create life), because the unforeseen
consequences of a big impact is not worth the small obvious gains.
Humans are not good at ppredicting the future, much more the downsides
and its cascading effects of our actions today.

My grandmother, to her credit, lived until her late 80s, and for at
least half of her life, she did not rely on modern medicine. For as long
as she could, she refused going to the doctor, except maybe during
pregnancies. Hospitals for her did not induce a healing environment, and
still they don't. Nowadays, it's getting harder to ignore medicine
because of the many factors that make it hard for Nature to do its
natural way of healing our bodies. With all the synthetic stressors
causing new diseases, can our natural way of regenerating even keep up?

If there's any good left in the world we are in right now, it's because
of the courage (willing or otherwise) of those who have soul in the
game, people who have taken risks for others. This comes in many forms:
artists making art in a tech-obsessed world that continues to rob us of
our creativity; medical frontliners who continue to care, especially,
not in spite of, the pandemic; activists who continue to fight for what
they believe is right, fueled not by the prospect of winning in the
short term, but [by the joy of it all](/joyful-militancy); etc.

## Skin in the game

**Note to self**: Be willing to take [calculated] risks and face the
consequences of each with dignity. Non-risk takers might call you out on
this endeavor, but don't mind them if they have nothing to offer except
empty words. "Dogs can't insult me," and even that is an insult to dogs
to be compared to those who bark but have no [skin in the game](/skin-in-the-game).

"How often someone is right is largely irrelevant in the real world
but [...] one needs to be a practitioner, not a talker, to figure it
out." Even if you're correct most of the time, it only takes one grave
error to undo all that. Think pilots, police, politicians, or any
profession that has relatively big influence over many people.

When looking at a published research, and the ideas presented therein
are applicable to real life, check the researcher whether they are using
these ideas on their personal life. If not, why?

Is something worth having? One metric to check is if it has marketing,
or it is heavily advertised. If so, it's likely a bad product or
service, or is made/produced/shipped unethically, or both!

## Ethics

Taleb advises, "One should give more weight to witnesses and opinions
when they present the opposite of a conflict of interest." On this line
of thinking, I'm thinking of a few examples: listen only to "economists"
who know that economics is useless; and lawyers who are not only
self-aware of their need to lie but uses that privilege to punch up.
More respect also goes to artisans, creators, producers, makers, who
*encourage* the public to pirate their works.
