---
title: "Understanding Automation"
date: 2020-06-05
draft: false
---

How nice it would be to automate every little boring job that we
currently now have?

You might think that your administrative office work could be completed
within one or two hours with a basic understanding of a
[computer programming language](/programming)[^python]. Or you could be a sewer
hunter[^sewer hunter] of our modern times, wishfully thinking, "When do
we finally invent a machine that can complete the job, instead of me
going down the drain?" Unless it's something you enjoy doing. In which
case, more power to you!

[^python]: Even a non-programmer will benefit from learning a
programming language. Check out Python for more info here:
https://python.org

[^sewer hunter]: Dash, M. (2012, June 29). *Quite Likely the Worst Job
Ever*. Smithsonian Magazine.
https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/quite-likely-the-worst-job-ever-319843/

Automation of jobs are key to a more fulfilling life, especially those
that are a threat the worker's safety and well-being. It has the
potential to free people from their regular miseries. Imagine all the
things one could do after regaining some of the time that was previously
allocated for "work". More people would then look into other avenues of
[creating value](/life-value).

## Is it even possible?

There's a lot to unpack here, and I'm not the right person to go through
tem. But here are a few thoughts.

### To be Sick and Tired

For blue collar jobs: doing something for one-third of a day is
exhausting, physically and mentally.

For white collar jobs: *pretending* to be doing something for one-third
of a day is exhausting, physically and mentally.

For every other job in between: either or both.

By the end of shift when you're really tired, it's hard to be in a
mental space to do other hobbies.

[Capitalism](/capitalism) pushes us to work until we drop dead, because
it doesn't want us to do other things that have no profit motive. It
destroys freedom in every corner of our lives while spouting "Free
Market for All" like it's some gospel.

Since automation would allow the working class more freedom, it is
heavily regulated by the ruling class.

### High-tech dystopia?

Automation of everything requires an access to a certain level of
[technology](/technology). The consensus as of writing is to develop
[artificial intelligence](/ai) and/or [machine learning](/ml) (AI/ML).
Engineers and scientists have been exploring fields which AI integration
would vastly improve the quality of work.

But, as with all technology, its capabilities are a function of the
biases of those that develop them. Like how dictionaries can be
racist.[^dict1][^dict2] Or like how facial recognition software can be
racist. [^face1][^face2]

[^dict1]: Abagond, J. (2016, April 5). *“The dictionary was written by
White people.”* Abagond.
https://abagond.wordpress.com/2016/04/05/the-dictionary-was-written-by-white-people/
[^dict2]:*“BUT THE DICTIONARY SAYS---”* (2012, October 20). FUCK YOUR
RACISM.
https://fuckyourracism.tumblr.com/post/33943946460/but-the-dictionary-says
[^face1]: Najibi, A. (2020, October 26). *Racial Discrimination in Face
Recognition Technology*. Science in the News.
https://sitn.hms.harvard.edu/flash/2020/racial-discrimination-in-face-recognition-technology/
[^face2]: Breland, A. (2017, December 4). *How white engineers built
racist code – and why it’s dangerous for black people*. The Guardian.
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/dec/04/racist-facial-recognition-white-coders-black-people-police

Moreover, the idea that machines are more efficient in doing tasks than
humans is important to acknowledge here. We must remember that while the
Industrial Revolution (arguably) increased productivity by employment of
machines, it has also allowed efficient and effective [destruction](/destruction) of our
natural environment which, in my opinion, offsets the benefits gained.

Consider this: The future of automation will likely depend on the
development of AI/ML. AI/ML relies on the processing prowess of
computers which rely on their hardware. Electronics rely on mining
industry, supply chain logistics, and oil industry, all of which harms
the environment on a global scale.

There may be healthy compromise to be made among Effectivity,
Efficiency, and [Environmentalism](/eco-anarchism), although, between
us, I'm personally skeptical towards the second one. Our focus, then,
should be in figuring that one out *soon*. Besides, everything neither
can be or has to be fully automated.

## What is possible?

For now, we have to recognize that we cannot automate every boring task
there is, not even at the rate which our technology upgrades. In fact,
at the current rate, we can't still rely machines (as of this writing)
to make all the important and, dare I say, humane decisions. AI still
hallucinates, i.e., it produces erroneous material even with a carefully
constructed prompt.

## Suggestions for doing the Dirty Work

In the meantime, we need to consider several things when doing work that
nobody wants to do:

1. If nobody does it, and nothing happens when it doesn't get done, it
   probably didn't need to be done in the first place.
2. If the outcome does need to be achieved, we might look at alternative
   methods of achieving that end. For example, if nobody wants to clean
   the clogged sewers, then we should be mindful of our domestic waste
   *and* stop throwing them in the sewers!
3. If a certain task is the only way of achieving that end, then we
   should look at why it's unenjoyable, and how we might make it more
   bearable. We might also look at how it can be broken up into more
   bearable chunks. Still maintaining the clogged sewer as an example,
   we can see why cleaning it can be unpleasant.
   [Organizing the community](/community) to participate in a clean-up drive helps
   distribute the work load. To prevent fatigue, such clean-up drive
   would only last between three to six hours, scheduled regularly (say,
   thrice a week). Other members of the community could also provide
   free food for the cleaners as an incentive.
4. If nobody still wants to do it, it has to be done, there's no other
   available options, *and* it's as optimized and bearable as we can
   make it, whoever is able probably just takes turns.
