---
title: "Halaga"
date: 2025-01-31
draft: false
math: false
---

*Notes below are taken when I read the research book of [F. Landa Jocano](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/F._Landa_Jocano),
a Filipino anthropologist.*

{{< toc >}}

## Concept of halaga

The concept of *halaga* as [Filipino values](/filipino-values) is what
tells us what to value and what not to, putting some order in our
actions. It is the rubric with which we refer to when prioritizing
choices, ideas, sentiments, and even physical objects.

Halaga is a fluid concept that changes based on internal and external
events. We know this because what things were valued 50, 100, 200 years
ago aren't necessarily still the same today. Likewise, our values today
will be subject to change in the future.

### Nature of Halaga

The process of assigning halaga to ideas, objects, events, etc.,
requires engaging with them with our senses. This evaluation of things
transforms our physical and idea environment into this culturally
defined space we share and move within.

### Functions of Halaga

Our halaga norms are associated with our sensitivity. That's why we use
*mukha* (face) and *balat* (skin) as symbols of this fragility of
feelings, or as possible attack surfaces. For example, "*kapal ng
mukha*" (literally "thick face", meaning, so insensitive that it's
insulting) can be hurled as vitriol to another person, but can also be
used on self to claim the fortitude of one's ego.

Jocano argues that these ideas of "protecting the face" and "saving the
skin" is why we are both euphemistic and indirect with how we
communicate, especially on topics that we deem sensitive.

Halaga motivates us to do better and be better people in our
[communities](/community). This energy  is served into the social
circles, and each member within it would feel valued ("mahalaga"). They
would, in turn, put value in their work, and we have this positive
feedback loop, propelled by halaga. Without halaga, our output is
mediocre because we haven't put value in our work.

Halaga, of course, does not escape cooptation of [empire](/empire). For
example, one is given immense value at a [traditional and/or corporate]
work setting when one has traits like hard work, patience, perseverance,
and self-discipline---all good Filipino traits sure, but together they
make [a perfectly exploitable employee](/anti-work).

Filipinos also give halaga to social appearances, which is derived from
three main elements: physical actions, basic tendencies, and habits.
Thus, a behavior is given halaga if it helps a collective's welfare be
better and/or safer.
