---
title: "Kapwa"
date: 2025-01-31
draft: false
math: false
---

*Notes below are taken when I read the research book of [F. Landa Jocano](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/F._Landa_Jocano),
a Filipino anthropologist.*

{{< toc >}}

## Concept of Kapwa

*Kapwa* is tricky to translate to English, but it implies sameness of
identity, a shared orientation between people that's not necessarily
bound by familial ties nor [friendship](/friendship), although it surely
includes those as well. For example, when we speak of *kapwa-tao*, we
speak of fellow human beings.

Kapwa as a concept orients us to behave properly to one another.
Culturally, Filipinos (and I suspect many other Asian peoples) are
relationists.
[Being part of a group or tribe is key to surviving life](/community).
Individualism, one of the main imports of our Western
[neo]colonizers (sometimes locally called as *kanya-kanya*, or 'each to
their own self-interest), is frowned upon in many regions.

If kapwa as a concept is violated and co-opted by the [empire](/empire),
it can become nepotism, a major tool of graft and corruption that has
plagued Filipinos in all levels. Those who practice nepotism do not
really love their families. Love cannot and does not thrive in disgrace,
especially when veiled with open lies.

To observe kapwa standards, we have to follow the dominant rules,
including:

- *pakikisama* (get along, be concerned and supportive)
- *pakikitungo* (act humbly, to concede)
- *pakikiramay* (sympathize, condole, share sufferings)

## *Pakikisama*

*Pakikisama* is not just getting along with others, blindly or
otherwise. It is a type of good human relations. When we use it to
communicate, we become tactful and not just resort to being frank.
Filipinos are known to value sensitivity.

However, pakikisama can and is used as a convenient alibi to try to
escape or rationalize the negative consequences of one's actions (or
inactions).

## *Pakikitungo*

*Pakikitungo* is used when the consequence of our action is not within
our immediate control. We might want to "act humbly" or "concede" to
possibly avoid the negative effects in the present. We might also
"compromise" or "meet people halfway" to come to an agreed conclusion (a
win-win situation) in which all parties could benefit from.

## *Pakikiramay*

*Pakikiramay* is the norm governing behavior in times of crises. It's
expected that during crises, one has to go out of their way to condole,
sympathize, or share sorrows of others. Though, pakikiramay is
voluntary, showing no concern about others in times of crises is
regarded as "walang pakikiramay" (no compassion), and is ostracized.
