---
title: "The power of Love"
date: 2024-10-07
draft: false
math: false
---

*The following notes stem from reading bell hooks's book* All About
Love: New Visions.

I will always be reminded of that time when someone close to me urged me
to stop intellectualizing feelings. This, of course, includes love.

## "What is love?"

John Bradshaw claims that [patriarchy](/patriarchy), its institutions
and how they affect us daily, hinders our ability to love and thus must
be abolished.

According to M. Scott Peck, to love is to make the active choice of
"[extending] one's self for the purpose of nurturing [everyone's]
spiritual growth." It goes beyond romantic love, I know.

Investing feelings/emotions in someone does not necessarily mean we love
them. Especially in the case of abusive or hurtful relationships, this
cannot be true---one's spiritual growth is stunted.

Does the way we love need to depend on who we are, on what our gender
and sexual orientation are, on our origins, on our lived experience? It
is hard to think about it, but I feel like these do factor in my
relationships with people and what society expects of me, forming a
feedback loop.

It *is* important to talk about love, particularly Peck's definition, in
our daily lives to normalize and demystify the notions in and around it.
Young people need to hear this from older people.

## On children

There can be no love without [justice](/transformative-justice). If we
are dreaming of a just future, we can start with liberating the children
from the autocratic and fascistic tendencies of adults around them.
(Side note: I wonder if the beatings I took as a kid from a grandmother,
though relatively rare, were foundational to how I used to treat women
in my life. Many years later, a high school classmate, upon learning the
word from a class, said to me, "That's you! You're a misogynist." I
wonder if [a fraction of] my grandmother's hatred were transferred to
me...)

*Loving* discipline need not be hurtful and abusive, and can be done b
setting boundaries and teaching children how to set boundaries for
themselves before they misbehave. Punishments can be in the form of
taking away privileges.

It might be healthier for children to be in several parental caregivers.
Aside from the biological parents and/or legal guardians, godparents can
also be a parental figure to kids. (Unfortunately for me, I had no
godparents to turn to when I was young...)

## On honesty

Telling the truth will inevitably cause pain and conflict. Children will
learn to lie because they *can* discern that adults do not always mean
it to "tell the truth." As adults, how can we safely expose children to
the bad outcomes of honesty?

According to Carl Jung, "[W]here the will to power is permanent, love
will be lacking." To aspire for power (to dominate and control others)
would mean negation of love. Both cannot coexist at the same time. To
love is to treat others as you would yourself, which is what the Gospel
also says: "Love your neighbor as you love yourself."

When it comes to lies, bell hooks place advertising way up there:
"Advertising is one of the cultural mediums that has most sanctioned
lying. Keeping people in a constant state o lack, in perpetual desire,
strengthens marketplace economy... [Lies] strengthen the world of
predatory advertising."

Adults during my childhood had made sure to never verbally say something
obviously wrong about me. But it was their actions, I believe, that have
made the most impact on me, enough to acquire negative thinking.
Something about actions being louder than words. When they neglected me,
when they made me feel that I am not enough by infantilizing me, it has
led me to doubt myself.

Taking responsibility is not akin to disregarding the real effects of
[Empire](/empire)'s oppression. But we can choose how we respond to
[acts of] injustice. When we take responsibility for our welfare, we do
what we can to create a safe and healthy environment for us and
consequently for those we care about.

Eventually, I would need to stand up for myself in every human
interaction. This is one way of respecting myself, my decisions, and the
people around me. By setting boundaries, I am letting them know what I
will and will not do. Passivity can only do so much in an ever changing
society.

In a patriarchal society, gossip is and will be the medium of
[communication](/communication) in which people can feel comfortable saying what they think
and feel. Sans the filter and censorship, gossip allows us who
participate in it to be vulnerable because others who are with us in it
are too.

[Current work attacks our self-esteem especially when we hate it](/anti-work).
bell hooks argues, though, that to save ourselves, we must still do our
best. I can see why, but I am not fully convinced. Will giving our best
eventually save us? Or will it not only further entrench us but also
benefit our capitalist overlords?

## Spirituality

Spirituality runs against consumerism: diving deep into one means going
shallow on the other. I wonder if "hedonism" can exist in this spectrum
that influences each lifestyle differently.

I don't want to produce so that other can consume just for the sake of
it. Conversely, I don't want to mindlessly consume simply because
there's an abundance of production of Anything. Instead of just
producing, why not create a work of [art](/art)? Instead of just
consuming, can I just be with myself without worrying of survival?

Imagine if [religious people](/religion) practice love instade of spreading hate in
the name of their spiritual belief?

hooks tries to describe love in terms of how it is a "higher level of
consciousness." Eckhart Tolle, speaking of the same consciousness,
refers to it in temporal terms, calling it "Now". If we Love Now, have
we now reached a new dimension?

## On ethics

[We can only love and be loved in a world devoid of hierarchies](/revolution).
When we see ourselves in others and treat them as equals, we are more
open, more vulnerable to the possibilities of all sorts of relationships.

Cultures of domination rely on fear; sometimes tainting "love" and using
a lesser version of it to manipulate and subjugate other people. We see
this in many religions, cults, even governments that keep on promising,
but not really delivering, progress.

If the home cannot be the safe refuge from all the turmoils happening
outside, then there's nothing left but to seek shelter in the cloister
within oneself. This self-isolation puts bounds to our capacities to
love and feel love.

## Lovelessness causing addiction and greed

Or, "[Mo money mo problems](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gUhRKVIjJtw)"

Participating in materialistic and consumerist culture---in
greed---erodes moral stances, not because it is natural but when a
certain convenience is achieved, it is hard to go back.

Perhaps, NOW is the time to reassess my relationship with wishlists and
shopping carts in e-commerce sites. It's becoming an unhealthy habit
that I regularly check without resolution. Really, it helps no one
except the shops and the platforms they are in. Checking in is usually a
quick release from wanting something, itself an unhealthy hit of
dopamine.

We know by now that [capitalism](/capitalism) is an economic system that
incentivizes greed on all levels of social interaction. Big companies
won't grow if they wouldn't dehumanize and objectify their workers. We
frown upon slavery. That's why it gets a rebranding, and in its modern
reinterpretation, we can all at least get paid.

Instead of charity, generosity and [mutual aid](/mutual-aid) goes
against greed. Charity implies that the giver is higher in status and
has control over the recipients. Mutual aid espouses that we all have
the ability to empower one another, no matter where we are in life,
whether we are giving to or receiving from our comrades.

Any radical culture, like "peace and love" of the hippies, or the
underground punk, will be co-opted by the very systems they criticize
because its believers do not integrate their beliefs to the everyday and
mundane.

[Living simply](/simple-living) negates greed, and thus provides more
room for love to flourish. We can lend and borrow things to and from our
[community](/community). Admittedly, though, this is becoming harder as
people isolate themselves from their neighbors.

## Romance

"Falling in love" implies on has no choice but to let gravity of the
situation pull them together, excusing themselves of the consequences of
[in]actions. But to love means choosing it every time you feel it and
express it. You are responsible for what you do.

Like many people, I prefer erotic satisfaction with a romantic partner.
[Sex enhances the connection](/sex) between people. Could it then be a
form of communication to build a community?

Let love be an action verb. Language affects the way we think. We can
then change the narrative in love if *we* want to change.

Romantic love is put on a higher, albeit unnecessary, bar that is hard
to clear. Failing that, we condemn the whole notion of love, which
should not be, as there are other types of love outside of romantic
love. When we normalize the part of loving, romantic love will provide a
better end result.

"True love thrives on the difficulties." It is therefore [antifragile](/antifragile).

## Life and death

Some folks in my life are getting patterns from the cultures of West
like Americans, and they have grown to admire death and question love
for life. Why? hooks describes worship of death as the intersection in
white supremacy, capitalism, and patriarchy.

Obviously, loving someone does not end at the end of their life. But I
have not had someone die and feel the loss. In reality, I may not have
fully loved them in a way that their permanent absence negatively
impacts me.

## Redemption

The pull of individualism is also strong in the context of finding a
loving partner. Many people would say that "you don't need anyone else."
Contrast that with [ethical non-monogamy](/non-monogamy), whose core
belief is that it is possible to love multiple partners at any one time,
as long as there is an honest and open communication with all the
parties involved.

hooks et. al, observe: "Estrangement from the realm of senses is a
direct product of overindulgence[...]" In order too get back to our true
selves, to heal from acquiring too much, we need to live simpler. It is
no wonder that many philosophers and gurus worth our time come from
simple lives and do not present themselves in a flashy manner.

## Divination

"Meeting an angel," or experiencing something similar, can be
interpreted as a personal divination of one's suffering and how they
wrestle with it head on. 

For psychoanalyst Alice Miller, a more grounded, earthly angel is
someone who has offered hope, love, and guidance to a wounded child in
any dysfunctinoal setting.

Like in real life, we cannot run away from
struggling and expect to be transformed positively. Perhaps in going
through it---to be baptized by fire---can we find answers and grow from the
ashes.
