---
title: "Notes on malware"
date: 2024-06-18
draft: false
math: false
---

Malware (malicious software) is software designed to harm devices or
networks.

Sometimes, the malicious code are [web-based exploits](/web-based-exploits)
used to take advantage of coding flaws in
a web application.

{{< toc >}}

## Common attacks

Some of the most common types of malware attacks today include:

Viruses
: Malicious code written to interfere with [computer](/computer)
operations and cause damage to data and software. A virus needs to be
initiated by a user (i.e., a [threat actor](/threat-actor)), who
transmits the virus via a malicious attachment or file download. When
someone opens the malicious attachment or download, the virus hides
itself in other files in the now infected system. When the infected
files are opened, it allows the virus to insert its own code to damage
and/or destroy data in the system.

Worms
: Malware that can duplicate and spread itself across systems on its
own. In contrast to a virus, a worm does not need to be downloaded by a
user. Instead, it self-replicates and spreads from an already infected
computer to other devices on the same network. A well known example is
the Blaster worm, also known as Lovesan, Lovsan, or MSBlast. In the
early 2000s, this worm spread itself on computers running Windows XP and
Windows 2000 operating systems. It would force devices into a continuous
loop of shutting down and restarting. Although it did not damage the
infected devices, it was able to spread itself to hundreds of thousands
of users around the world. Many variants of the Blaster worm have been
deployed since the original and can infect modern computers.

Trojan (or Trojan horse)
: Malware that looks like a legitimate file or program. Similar to
viruses, attackers deliver this type of malware hidden in file and
application downloads. Attackers rely on tricking unsuspecting users
into believing they’re downloading a harmless file, when they’re
actually infecting their own device with malware that can be used to spy
on them, grant access to other devices, and more.

Adware
: Advertising-supported software, or adware, is a type of legitimate
software that is sometimes used to display digital advertisements in
applications. Software developers often use adware as a way to lower
their production costs or to make their products free to the
public---also known as freeware or shareware. In these instances,
developers monetize their product through ad revenue rather than at the
expense of their users. Malicious adware falls into a sub-category of
malware known as a potentially unwanted application (PUA). A PUA is a
type of unwanted software that is bundled in with legitimate programs
which might display ads, cause device slowdown, or install other
software. Attackers sometimes hide this type of malware in freeware with
insecure design to monetize ads for themselves instead of the developer.
This works even when the user has declined to receive ads.

Ransomware
: A malicious attack where threat actors encrypt an organization's data
and demand payment to restore access. An example is the
[WannaCry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WannaCry_ransomware_attack)
attack that encrypts a victim's computer until a ransom payment of
cryptocurrency is paid.

Spyware
: Malware that’s used to gather and sell information without
[consent](/consent). Spyware can be used to access devices. This allows
threat actors to collect personal data, such as private emails, texts,
voice and image recordings, and locations.

Scareware
: This type of malware employs tactics to frighten users into infecting
their own device. Scareware tricks users by displaying fake warnings
that appear to come from legitimate companies. Email and pop-ups are
just a couple of ways scareware is spread. Both can be used to deliver
phony warnings with false claims about the user's files or data being at
risk.

Fileless malware
: Fileless malware does not need to be installed by the user because it
uses legitimate programs that are already installed to infect a
computer. This type of infection resides in memory where the malware
never touches the hard drive. This is unlike the other types of malware,
which are stored within a file on disk. Instead, these stealthy
infections get into the operating system or hide within trusted
applications. This type of malware is detected by performing memory
analysis, which requires experience with operating systems.

Rootkits
: A rootkit is malware that provides remote, administrative access to a
computer. Most attackers use rootkits to open a backdoor to systems,
allowing them to install other forms of malware or to conduct [network
security](/network-security) attacks. This kind of malware is often
spread by a combination of two components: a dropper and a loader. A
**dropper** is a type of malware that comes packed with malicious code
which is delivered and installed onto a target system. For example, a
dropper is often disguised as a legitimate file, such as a document, an
image, or an executable to deceive its target into opening, or dropping
it, onto their device. If the user opens the dropper program, its
malicious code is executed and it hides itself on the target system.
Multi-staged malware attacks, where multiple packets of malicious code
are deployed, commonly use a variation called a loader. A **loader** is
a type of malware that downloads strains of malicious code from an
external source and installs them onto a target system. Attackers might
use loaders for different purposes, such as to set up another type of
malware---a botnet.

Botnet
: A botnet (robot network) is a collection of computers infected by
malware that are under the control of a single threat actor, known as
the “bot-herder.” Viruses, worms, and trojans are often used to spread
the initial infection and turn the devices into a bot for the
bot-herder. The attacker then uses file sharing, email, or social media
application protocols to create new bots and grow the botnet. When a
target unknowingly opens the malicious file, the computer, or bot,
reports the information back to the bot-herder, who can execute commands
on the infected computer.

## Notable attacks

To understand [cybersecurity](/cybersecurity) attacks in the digital age,
below are two notable attacks that relied on the [internet](/internet):
the LoveLetter attack and the Equifax breach.

### LoveLetter attack

In the year 2000, Onel De Guzman created the [LoveLetter malware](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ILOVEYOU) to steal
internet login credentials. This attack spread rapidly and took
advantage of people who had not developed a healthy suspicion for
unsolicited emails. Users received an email with the subject line, "I
Love You." Each email contained an attachment labeled, "Love Letter For
You." When the attachment was opened, the malware scanned a user's
address book. Then, it automatically sent itself to each person on the
list and installed a program to collect user information and passwords.
Recipients would think they were receiving an email from a friend, but
it was actually malware. The LoveLetter ended up infecting 45 million
computers globally and is believed to have caused over $10 billion
dollars in damages. The LoveLetter attack is the first example of
[social engineering](/social-engineering).

### Equifax Breach

In 2017, attackers successfully infiltrated the credit reporting agency,
[Equifax](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2017_Equifax_data_breach).
This resulted in one of the largest known data breaches of
sensitive information. Over 143 million customer records were stolen,
and the breach affected approximately 40% of all Americans.

The records included personally identifiable information including
social security numbers, birth dates, driver's license numbers, home
addresses, and credit card numbers. From a [security](/security)
standpoint, the
breach occurred due to multiple failures on Equifax's part. It wasn't
just one vulnerability that the attackers took advantage of, there were
several. The company failed to take the actions needed to fix multiple
known vulnerabilities in the months leading up to the data breach.

In the end, Equifax settled with the U.S. government and paid over $575
million dollars to resolve customer complaints and cover required fines.
