---
title: "Notes on organizing"
date: 2025-08-24
draft: false
math: false
---

![Organize!](/image/organize.jpg)

{{< toc >}}

## Tools

Tools, in whatever form they take, are an integral part of how we
organize for whatever cause or advocacy we believe in.

There is a balance to be made between not getting caught in analysis
paralysis in choosing the "right" tools, and using the very
exploitative tools (*coughs* [social media](/social-media) *coughs*)
that people-in-power use on us to keep us in check.

### Internet presence

Social media is an important topic here, in my opinion. Big platforms
like Facebook and Instagram are the obvious choice of NGOs, because each
reaches a lot of people, for the fact that many people are using these
in their daily lives. Moreover, the idea of a democratized internet is
continously being eroded by these companies, wanting to fence and
gatekeep as much "content" and information as possible within their
platforms, so much so that many people think that, say, Facebook is the
internet.

Sharing links from big tech platforms to people outside it can be also
sketchy. In my experience, even posts that are supposedly set in public
do not guarantee a log-in wall would not appear and break the viewing
experience. It is one of those deceptive patterns they employ to coerce
the viewer to get into the platform if they want to continue
viewing/reading/watching the "content" in it.

Despite these, securing a domain name and making a dedicated website is
not prioritized. This is more evident among smaller groups who lack
resources and manpower develop and maintain a website.

On the other hand, such groups are missing out on having complete
control over what they can post, and are instead delegating it to the
whims of technofeudal lords at Silicon Valley.

[POSSE](https://indieweb.org/POSSE) (Publish (on your) Own Site,
Syndicate Elsewhere) is a decent compromise between using social media
platforms in conjunction with a dedicated website or blog.
