---
title: "On having (or not) a personal brand"
date: 2025-03-20
draft: false
math: false
---

{{< toc >}}

## Intro

We have reached a stage that You, the everyday person, can be a brand,
that can be commodified, bought or sold, because
[Capitalism](/capitalism) not only encourages you to do it, but because
doing so increases your chance of surviving in it.

Having a personal brand means the saleability of you, which can be done
relatively easier through [social media marketing](/social-media).

## Some (?) problems, though

The problem lies on how we as a society view what success looks like.

Why is that we must be consumable, palatable even?

It should be no secret that schools can be and has been the breeding
ground for the next batch complacent working class, with a few members
of the ruling class who will grow complicit to the maintenance and
legacy of capitalism. Students are prepared to apply to big named
universities, because successfully getting in means "a chance to a
brighter tomorrow." And getting in means they are now encouraged to
embrace the institution as part of their identity---or *personal
brand*---that they must invoke when the time is right. For the
delusional, "now" is always the right time.

Naomi Klein echoes in her book *Doppelganger* the warnings in
doppelganger fiction: "be careful about falling in love with your
projectionl it could well overtake you."

Klein further asks: "What aren't we building when are building our
brands?" If personal brands become objects that may look and feel like
us, [possibly even after death](/ai/#grief-tech), but are different,
external, and fixed, what important things we might be omitting during
the creation? Dealing with these complexities is why I hate having a
perosnal brand myself. And I would describe myself by which I am not,
via negativa, which is more [antifragile](/antifragile).

## Further reading

