---
title: "Let's Go!"
date: 2024-05-06T07:33:41+08:00
keywords: ["ohio olarte", "oqolarte", "oqo"]
draft: false
math: false
---

*I rediscovered the sitcom _Let's Go!_ in Youtube, a 2006 ABS-CBN show
about a group of college kids navigating the college life.*

Here I am again at year 2006. Somehow my world looks simpler but only
because I remain oblivious to both the more beautiful and more horrible
things going on around me that are not explicitly taught in school or
are not being shared among my social circles.

In the future---about 18 years from now---I might say to myself that as
we grow older, we believe more that simplicity is a function of time.
But I don't know that yet. And hasn't the universe always been vibrant?
Nature, also, the local earth version of it, at least, is lively beyond
our simplest imaginations, no matter how we perceive it. It is 2006.
What is simpler? How can things be?

I wake up refreshed a nap (as I do) when I decide to turn on the TV to
see what's on.

*Let's Go!* is what I stumble upon this Saturday afternoon. The
characters have the fashion sense of the common folk in this time: shirt
and jeans, shirt and skirt, and/or the most obnoxious accessories that
yell mid 2000s.

I pay attention to the quirks of each character, trying not to cringe at
the unfunny jokes that I'm sure could have been written better to make
me laugh. But, really, as long as there are traces of humor in it, it's
fine. I'm here to enjoy the show, to imagine myself as one of the
misfits.

The actors look very Pinoy and not mestizos and mestizas. At least that
part the show's producers got right.
